How did we come to Africa?
It was because we went through Gilead.
We attended the 47th class of Gilead,
and that was in 1969.
Our first assignment
was in the Belgian Congo,
which is now
the Democratic Republic of Congo.
When we got our assignment,
we were not overjoyed.
All we’d heard
about the Congo was war,
atrocities, mercenaries.
So we weren’t excited.
In fact, Susanne cried all night.
But we had promised to serve
Jehovah with our whole soul,
and we had said, “Here we are!
Send us.”
And so we accepted the assignment.
When we first arrived
in the small mining town in Katanga,
we were arrested
as soon as we got off the plane.
Then there was nobody to meet us.
The telegram,
which had been sent three days earlier,
arrived on the same plane.
The missionaries had all returned
to their home countries
for the international conventions.
So when we eventually arrived
at the missionary home,
it was empty,
and there were
only big, dead cockroaches
and bullet holes in the walls.
So we were alone for three weeks
until the other missionaries arrived.
The next hurdle to overcome
was to get used to a complete new culture
and also to learn two languages.
Communication with our families
was also a problem
—there was no Internet,
no phones.
The only way was by letters,
and it took three weeks
or almost four weeks
for a letter to get to our families
and another four weeks
to get a reply.
For years, we traveled
in the bush doing
circuit and district work.
This meant living in the villages
in mud huts.
And so we would get
water from the river
and use candles
for our power
(our electricity there)
and charcoal
to do our cooking on.
We had toilets outside
—a hole in the ground.
It was real village life.
To get there,
we had to travel on roads
that were often almost nonexistent
or very, very bad
—rocky, deep sand,
muddy.
When it was muddy,
it was deep mud,
and we’d get stuck.
In fact, one trip we did,
2,000 kilometers
took us ten days.
A lot of it was sand.
And one day,
we only went 70 kilometers,
and we had to dig
the vehicle out 12 times.
But we got there
with Jehovah’s help.
And as far as we were concerned,
this was missionary life
—this was real missionary life.
This was what we’d come to do.
We felt closer to Jehovah
when we were in the bush
under those difficult circumstances
than we ever have.
It was great!
We loved it,
and it’s really a big part of our life.
Some ask us if we ever desired
to return to Europe.
Truthfully, yes.
But only very momentarily.
The work was under ban
for ten years.
To carry on a religion
that was banned was a prison sentence
of between five
and ten years in prison.
And we’d been caught
carrying on a religion
that was banned.
We were in custody for 18 days.
Nobody knew we were under arrest
—the branch or the missionary home—
because we were so deep
in the bush.
We were 2,000 kilometers
away from the branch.
So it was just us and Jehovah.
Well, we saw Jehovah’s hand.
He heard our prayers,
and he answered us.
For example,
we were running out of money
and a complete stranger
offered us 200 dollars (U.S.),
and that was a lot of money
in those days.
The man that handled
our court case was very kind.
He made a new statement,
and at the end,
he wrote,
“I know of no law
that prohibits me from visiting
my Christian brothers.”
With that he said,
“You’re free to go.”
And what a wonderful feeling
it is to be free.
After we had experienced
Jehovah’s help
and support,
how could we be so ungrateful
as to want to leave
our assignment?
That is why I said that it was
only for a moment that we wanted
to return to Europe.
Another time
at a small bush assembly
there was the threat
that it would be stopped
by the authorities.
So that the brothers
would get spiritual food,
I divided them into two groups
—one group sat outside
the assembly arena;
the other half was inside.
I put on a pair of shorts,
a vest, a hat,
and sat in a camp chair;
and gave my talk
so that if any authorities came,
I would say, “I’m only rehearsing.”
Anyway,
when the first half had heard,
the others came in
and I gave the talk again.
On the day of the assembly,
the zone commissioner came,
and he said
we couldn’t continue until he
checked something.
He sent his men around to check
who had not paid the tax,
because lies had been said
about Jehovah’s Witnesses
—that we don’t pay tax.
And he was so surprised
when they came back and said,
“Boss, everybody’s paid.”
And so he stood up,
and he said,
“OK, you can carry on
with your assembly.”
We were so grateful
to Jehovah for that.
Zambia is a real preaching paradise.
People are humble.
They’re God-fearing.
And with Jehovah’s help,
we have been able to help
more than 130 people
to come to baptism.
So we are happy in our assignment.
What began 46 years ago
with tears
and fear of the unknown
has turned out to be
a wonderful blessing,
full of privileges
and joy.
We’ve seen firsthand
how Jehovah has cared for us.
In fact,
he’s ‘opened up the floodgates
of heaven
and poured out a blessing.’
As we look back over the years,
we’re absolutely convinced
that the blessings
outweighed the hardships.
If we had the chance,
we’d do it all over again.